LSH (locality-sensitive hashing) (Indyk and Motwani, 1999)
This is a powerful and versatile algorithm that works with more than just vectors.
This involves hashing similar vectors into the same buckets to speed up similarity
search, trading some accuracy for efficiency. It’s implemented in FAISS and
Annoy.
HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World) (Malkov and Yashunin, 2016)
HNSW constructs a multi-layer graph where nodes represent vectors, and edges
connect similar vectors, allowing nearest-neighbor searches by traversing graph
edges. Its implementation by the authors is open source, and it’s also imple‐
mented in FAISS and Milvus.
Product Quantization (Jégou et al., 2011)
This works by reducing each vector into a much simpler, lower-dimensional rep‐
resentation by decomposing each vector into multiple subvectors. The distances
are then computed using the lower-dimensional representations, which are
much faster to work with. Product quantization is a key component of FAISS
and is supported by almost all popular vector search libraries.
IVF (inverted file index) (Sivic and Zisserman, 2003)
IVF uses K-means clustering to organize similar vectors into the same cluster.
Depending on the number of vectors in the database, it’s typical to set the num‐
ber of clusters so that, on average, there are 100 to 10,000 vectors in each cluster.
During querying, IVF finds the cluster centroids closest to the query embedding,
and the vectors in these clusters become candidate neighbors. Together with
product quantization, IVF forms the backbone of FAISS.
Annoy (Approximate Nearest Neighbors Oh Yeah) (Bernhardsson, 2013)
Annoy is a tree-based approach. It builds multiple binary trees, where each tree
splits the vectors into clusters using random criteria, such as randomly drawing a
line and splitting the vectors into two branches using this line. During a search, it
traverses these trees to gather candidate neighbors. Spotify has open sourced its
implementation.
There are other algorithms, such as Microsoft’s SPTAG (Space Partition Tree And
Graph), and FLANN (Fast Library for Approximate Nearest Neighbors).
Even though vector databases emerged as their own category with the rise of RAG,
any database that can store vectors can be called a vector database. Many traditional
databases have extended or will extend to support vector storage and vector search.
RAG | 263
